Upgrade Strimzi Operator to v0.45.0 (#5)
sighupio/add-on-kafka: docs/releases/v0.3.0.md

# Kafka Add On Module Release 0.3.0

> Welcome to the latest release of `kafka` module of the [`SIGHUP Distribution`](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-distribution) maintained by team SIGHUP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Welcome to the latest release of `kafka` module of the [`SIGHUP Distribution`](https://github.com/sighupio/distribution) maintained by team SIGHUP.
```

## Component Images 🚢

| Component                | Supported Version                                                                                      | Previous Version |
|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|
| `Strimzi Operator`       | [`v0.45.0`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/releases/tag/0.45.0)                     | `v0.42.0`        |
| `Monitoring configs`     | `v0.3.0`                                                                                               | `v0.2.0`         |

> Please refer to the individual release notes to get detailed information on each release.

## Bug Fixes and Changes 🐛

- Strimzi operator upgraded to `v0.45.0`
- Add support for Kafka versions `3.8.0`, `3.8.1`, `3.9.0`

## Breaking Changes 💔

- Drop support for Kafka versions < `3.8.0`
- Drop support for ZooKeeper
- Drop support for Kafka cluster not using `KafkaNodePool`

## Update Guide 🦮

> The upgrade procedure consists in four steps of which the first two needs to be done only if the Kafka cluster already existing don't use KRaft and KafkaNodePools:

Reviewer 2: This sentence is a little hard to parse, I suggest something like this:

```suggestion
The upgrade procedure consists in four steps, two optional steps to prepare the cluster for the upgrade that need to be done only if the Kafka cluster being upgraded doesn't use `KRaft` and `KafkaNodePool`, and another two steps for the upgrade itself.

The overall steps are:
```

> 1. Migrate existing Kafka cluster to KafkaNodePools (Optional)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Migrate existing Kafka cluster to KafkaNodePool (Optional)
```

2. Migrate from ZooKeeper to KRaft (Optional)
3. Upgrade the operator.
4. Upgrade the Kafka cluster.

> ### 1. Migrate existing Kafka cluster to KafkaNodePools

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 1. Migrate existing Kafka cluster to KafkaNodePool
```

> If already existing Kafka clusters do not use KafkaNodePools then this step is necessary to proceed with the upgrade. First a `KafkaNodePool` resource needs to be created. The resource should be labeled with the `strimzi.io/cluster: <CLUSTER_NAME>` label where `<CLUSTER_NAME>` is the Kafka resource name. Set the replica count and storage configuration to match your current Kafka cluster, also set the roles to broker. Here is an example manifest:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the already existing Kafka cluster(s) do not use `KafkaNodePool` then this step is necessary to migrate to `KafkaNodePool` before proceeding with the upgrade.

First, a `KafkaNodePool` resource needs to be created. The resource must be created with the following characteristics:

- It must be labeled with the `strimzi.io/cluster: <CLUSTER_NAME>` label where `<CLUSTER_NAME>` is the Kafka resource name.
- The replica count and storage configuration must match your current Kafka cluster.
- The roles must be set to `broker`.

Here is an example manifest:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: kafka
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  roles:
    - broker
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 10Gi
        deleteClaim: false
```

And here is an example Kafka resource manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  zookeeper:
    # ...
```

> [!WARNING]  

> > To preserve cluster data and the names of its nodes and resources, the node pool name must be kafka, and the strimzi.io/cluster label matches the Kafka resource name. Otherwise, nodes and resources are created with new names, including the persistent volume storage used by the nodes. Consequently, your previous data may not be available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> To preserve cluster data and the names of its nodes and resources, the node pool name must be `kafka`, and the `strimzi.io/cluster` label must match the Kafka resource name. Otherwise, nodes and resources will be created with new names, including the persistent volume storage used by the nodes, and consequently your previous data may not be available.
```

Apply the KafkaNodePool resource with:

```bash
kubectl apply -f <node_pool_configuration_file>
```

> Or if you are using Kustomize you can simply add the resource manifest file to the `resources` array. By applying this resource, you switch Kafka to using node pools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Or if you are using Kustomize you can simply add the resource manifest file to the `resources` array. By applying this resource, you switch Kafka to use node pools (`KafkaNodePool`).
```

> [!NOTE]
> There is no change or rolling update and resources are identical to how they were before.

> Enable support for node pools in the Kafka resource using the `strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled` annotation. Here is an example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secondly, enable support for node pools in the Kafka resource using the `strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled` annotation. Here is an example:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  zookeeper:
    # ...
```

Apply the Kafka resource.

> [!NOTE]
> There is no change or rolling update and resources are identical to how they were before.

Remove the replicated properties from the Kafka custom resource. When the `KafkaNodePool` resource is in use, you can remove the properties that you copied to the `KafkaNodePool` resource, such as the `.spec.kafka.replicas` and `.spec.kafka.storage` properties.

> For more information about migrating to `KafkaNodePools` read the specific [documentation](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/0.45.0/full/deploying#proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information about migrating to `KafkaNodePool` read the specific [documentation](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/0.45.0/full/deploying#proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str)
```

### 2. Migrate from ZooKeeper to KRaft

> ZooKeeper has been deprecated since Kafka version >= `3.5` and is set to be deprecated with version `4`. The new protocol is KRaft. In this step we will migrate an existing cluster which uses `KafkaNodePools` (necessary pre-requisite) from ZooKeeper to KRaft.

Reviewer 2: Which one is it? it's been deprecated since >= 3.5 or will it be deprecated in 4.0? May be you intended removed in 4.0?

```suggestion
ZooKeeper has been deprecated since Kafka version >= `3.5` and is set to be removed with version `4`. The new protocol is KRaft. In this step we will migrate an existing cluster which uses `KafkaNodePool` (necessary pre-requisite) from ZooKeeper to KRaft.
```

Author: Yes I meant removed. It's been deprecated since >= 3.5 and has been removed in Kafka v4

> [!IMPORTANT]  

> > Be sure to have enough space for the provisioning of PVCs during the migration.

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to say here how many PVCs or how much extra space is needed

Edit the `Kafka` resource and add the `strimzi.io/kraft: disabled` annotation. Apply the change.

> Create the `KafkaNodePool` resource for the KRaft controllers, here is an example:
> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
Create the `KafkaNodePool` resource for the KRaft controllers, here is an example:

```yaml
````

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: controller
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  roles:
    - controller
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 100Gi
        deleteClaim: false
```

Then change the annotation on the corresponding `Kafka` resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/kraft: migration # updated from "disabled" to "migration" to trigger the migration process
    strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled
# ...
```

> Apply the changes and wait for the operator to start the migration. Then monitor the cluster and wait that it reaches the `KRaftPostMigration` state. Then there are two choices:

Reviewer 2: Let's say where should one look, I guess in the kafka cluster object status field?

Author: Yes the status will be showed there.

> - Finalize the migration to KRaft;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Finalize the migration to KRaft.
```

- Rollback to ZooKeeper.

#### Finalize the migration to KRaft

> To finalize the migration the annotation `strimzi.io/kraft` needs to be changed to `enabled`, as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To finalize the migration, the annotation `strimzi.io/kraft` needs to be changed to `enabled`, as follows:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/kraft: enabled # updated from "migration" to "enabled" to finalize the migration process
    strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled
# ...
```

> The operator will configure the KRaft controllers without the ZooKeeper connection details, with the migration flag disabled, and roll them. When both brokers and controllers are working in KRaft mode, the operator will delete all the resources related to ZooKeeper as well. At this point, the user can delete the .spec.zookeeper section from the Kafka custom resource because it is not needed anymore.

Reviewer 2: The user can, should or must delete the spec section?

```suggestion
The operator will configure the KRaft controllers without the ZooKeeper connection details, with the migration flag disabled, and roll them. When both brokers and controllers are working in KRaft mode, the operator will delete all the resources related to ZooKeeper as well. At this point, the user can delete the `.spec.zookeeper` section from the Kafka custom resource because it is not needed anymore.
```

Author: The user should delete the `.spec.zookeeper` section to avoid having old configuration in the manifest.

#### Rollback to ZooKeeper

If the migration process is still not finalized, with the KRaft controllers remaining connected to ZooKeeper, it is still possible to initiate a rollback. By applying the rollback value on the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation, the operator reconfigures the brokers with the connection details to ZooKeeper again and rolls them. Here is an example:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/kraft: rollback # updated from "migration" to "rollback" to revert the migration process
    strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled
# ...

> ```
> Following the rollback, the cluster metadata state moves back to `KRaftDualWriting`, waiting for the user to finalize the process.

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```

Following the rollback, the cluster metadata state moves back to `KRaftDualWriting`, waiting for the user to finalize the process.
````

After that, delete the `KafkaNodePool` hosting the KRaft controllers and then apply the disabled value annotation.

### 3. Upgrade the operator

> [!NOTE]
> The upgrade triggers rolling updates, where brokers are restarted one by one at different stages of the process. During this time, overall cluster availability is temporarily reduced, which may increase the risk of message loss in the event of a broker failure.

> Apply the new operator, the new deployment will start with the v0.45.0 running. If there are Kafka clusters of an unsupported version the operator will print an `unsupported version` warning. This will be resolved with the next step.

Reviewer 2: Where will this `unsupported version` warning be printed? In the operator logs?

Author: Yes in the operator logs. I'm adding a clarification.

# Kafka Add On Module Release 0.3.0

Welcome to the latest release of `kafka` module of the [`SIGHUP Distribution`](https://github.com/sighupio/distribution) maintained with ❤️ by team [SIGHUP by ReeVo](https://sighup.io/).

## Component Images 🚢

| Component                | Supported Version                                                                                      | Previous Version |
|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|
| `Strimzi Operator`       | [`v0.45.0`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/releases/tag/0.45.0)                     | `v0.42.0`        |
| `Monitoring configs`     | `v0.3.0`                                                                                               | `v0.2.0`         |

> Please refer to the individual release notes to get detailed information on each release.

## Bug Fixes and Changes 🐛

- Strimzi operator upgraded to `v0.45.0`
- Add support for Kafka versions `3.8.0`, `3.8.1`, `3.9.0`

## Breaking Changes 💔

- Drop support for Kafka versions < `3.8.0`
- Drop support for ZooKeeper

> - Drop support for Kafka cluster not using `KafkaNodePool`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Drop support for Kafka cluster not using `KafkaNodePool`
- Switched to Kustomize v5.6.0
```
